The tapes are on.
Okay, so you wrote the Essex book, so yeah, could you kind of give us a general history of those, and then I'll hit on the specifics that you don't cover?
Well, in the first place, I'd moved from Syracuse, New York, to Los Angeles District in the 65.
And that time I was working as a tech writer for the space defense industry, and of course I was writing on the side.
I built up a good backlog of science fiction novels and short stories, but I hadn't become a full-time writer.
Well, in 1959, a month before the first moon landing, NASA had its funds cut way back, and thousands of people working in the space industry were laid off, including myself.
So I couldn't get a job there for a while, and finally I got one, and I said, I want to go into full-time writing, and I did.
Well, shortly thereafter, though I had a lot of money coming in from my book publishers, I couldn't get it out of them.
I guess they were going through one of those slumps where they were reluctant to let loose funds, and they needed some money.
Well, at that time I was approached by a fellow named Brian Kirby, who was a science fiction fan, but he also was an editor for a pornographic book publishing outfit, I think called American Art Agency.
And he was starting a new line called Essex House.
Although Brian had been an editor for some time in the porno field, he was pretty much disgusted with the books because, on the writing level, it was very low.
There wasn't any characterization or plot or motivation, and very little imagination, and he wanted to raise the literary level of the porno books, at least the ones in the new line, Essex House.
He also loved science fiction, so he approached a number of science fiction authors, asked them if they'd be interested.
At that time, in 1969, I'd never even read one of those books, but she called Henry Miller, who's a porno writer, and I don't.
And I said, yeah, I'm a writer, I'd like to try anything, I'll even write romance if I had to.
So, he said there would be no taboos, or guidelines.
Normally, in the porno books, they have guidelines in which you have to have a sex scene every four or five, six pages.
He said you can write it exactly the way you want to.
So, I decided that I would write a satirical postage on my two heroes, one Tarzan, and one the hero of the Pope magazine series, which started in the 30s, called Doc Savage.
Doc Savage is pretty well known even now because Bannum reprinted, started reprinting his books in 1965.
So, I wrote that, and I had a lot of fun with it.
And it went out, where I didn't know.
And then I wrote a book called The Image of the Beast, which was sort of a satir on Gothic, and also on private eye novels, and incidentally, it was a satir on porno books, too.
So, that went out, and then I wrote a sequel called Blown, a sequel to The Image of the Beast.
And about that time, I got kind of tired.
I guess even if you have a vivid imagination, there's only so much that you can do with books that are basically sexual situations.
And though I'd give it my best, I had characterization and humor and thought and motivation and all that.
I kept tired of it, so I ceased writing for them.
About that time, my publishers started coming through with all the money they owed me anyway.
Now, what happened was that the people who ran the American Arts Agency knew nothing whatsoever about science fiction.
All they knew was porno books.
So, I made a very bad mistake in sending all these science fiction books, which I and some other science fiction readers had written, to porno book shops, not to the general book store.
And as a result, they didn't sell well because the usual porno customer wasn't interested in them.
And by the time that the science fiction people heard that these books were available,
the American Art Agency had already decided to cancel Essex House.
It wasn't a financial goal for them, but it was their own fault.
I don't know how many of these three books that I wrote were printed.
I do know that at one time I was told there were hundreds or maybe even thousands in a warehouse in Los Angeles.
But I've never been able to find out if they're still there or what because the American Art Agency closed up a couple of years ago.
And I've had no success in getting hold of the person who's handling the estate.
Is that enough or you want to ask me a question?
No, that sounds good.
Does it surprise you that the books are now considered to be top-end collector's items in command?
Oh, I've seen them anywhere from $75 to $150 apiece. Did that ever enter your mind?
Well, it never entered my mind at the time I wrote them.
If I had, I would have kept the copies that Brian Kirby gave me.
As it was, I just passed them out to friends there and there.
And as a result, I only have about one or two samples of each of them.
If I'd known what was going to happen, I would have purchased three or four boxfuls myself.
When the word got around, my, of course, collectors, being what they are, they look for rare and unusual books and they had difficulty finding them.
So of course the price went up right away and it's been going up steadily since then.
Another aspect of that was that after the American Art Agency folded, I got my rights back to the books and then I tried to sell them to a national publisher.
But I didn't have any success for ten years. Nobody would touch them.
And then finally, Playboy Press decided to publish them.
And Gannada in England decided that they would do it. Also another publisher, I forget their name.
The English publishers were taking a chance because they were afraid they would be bought to court as it happened.
They got by OK.
And now of course, like the books are in comparison with other books dealing with sex or not.
Well, I wouldn't exactly call them innocuous, but they're far-ranging sexual ideas are not so much that they can't be accepted now.
Back in 69 and 70 when I wrote them, my national publishers just tried to take a chance with them.
I always thought that the Doc Callahan character on the front of a feast unknown looked kind of like you.
The hair and the general facial features, is that just coincidence?
Well, it probably is unless Brian Kirby described me to the artist. What she could have done.
I never thought about told truth.
It's kind of a last gasp there.
Now Lord of the Trees and the Mad Goblin are clean sequels to the feast unknown.
And did you just kind of do those to keep up with the fun, the past-ish type writing?
Yeah, that was the main thing.
The thing was of course that in the feast unknown, my two heroes Doc Callahan and Lord Gerbertson were engaged in eliminating this ancient evil council of nine.
And they'd only knocked off a few in the first book.
So I wanted to continue their adventures which they did in the Mad Goblin and the Lord of the Trees.
And they succeeded in eliminating a few more of the council of nine.
However, there are still some left.
So I plan on writing at least one sequel to those finishing up the job.
Although I don't know when I'm going to do it.
You know, actually I have about 15 theories going, none of which I've ever finished.
Well, when I was young and went to a psychologist while I was attending a university in Missouri, he commented that I had terrible difficulty in finishing anything.
So we'll look forward to seeing some more of those then.
Well, I hope so. I had a lot of fun writing them.
And I didn't continue the sexual theme in them.
In the first place, I think I exhausted them in the first two books.
And the second place, it's difficult to get publishers to accept them if you do have that theme there.
A less obvious sequel to me was Trader to the Living as a sequel to Blown.
It seems like it was a little more subtle there that that might be a sequel.
Is it a sequel? Can it be considered a sequel?
Oh, yeah, that's a sequel.
Oh, I think some of the readers weren't aware of it at the time.
Actually, that's why I don't prefer another sequel, too, you know.
Good. I enjoyed it.
Okay, what about Love Song then? That was Brandon House.
Are they connected with Essex House or how did that come about?
Well, I guess it was like, yeah, okay.
I wrote that about the time and I decided I wasn't going to do it anymore, but I already had a contract.
So I wrote it. It was not science fiction.
It sounded like Gothic, but it had a rational explanation at the end.
That's even rarer, but then the feast on the Ones, the Beasts and Blown.
So I've noticed.
Very difficult to get hold of.
Again, I only have one copy.
Now, it has not been reprinted anywhere, has it?
No. I wanted to write in to whoever was handling this state and get the rights back.
Of course, I can't find him.
This wasn't Brian Kirby and Essex House.
That Brandon House is something different.
It was Brandon House was a line that had existed before Essex House.
But when Essex House ceased, then Brian Kirby went back to Brandon House, which he was with before he started Essex House.
And that was done with him.
Although by the time I'd finished the book, and if I remember correctly, Brian Kirby had already left American Art Agency.
If I can ever find the guy that's handling the business, well, I'll get the rights back to that and see this reprint.
So, for all I know, he died or he's unhiding for the police or went to Brazil or something.
Okay. While we're still in the gutter here, in the book by a guy named Lawrence Knapp called the first editions of Philip Jose Farmer,
he says that you wrote a book called As You Desire with a pseudonym William Norfolk.
Is that true?
Yeah, that's true.
But what happened was, I wrote that, a friend of mine who's working for another house came down and I was still needed money.
And I agreed with him to write it, but I said I wanted to do it under an armed plume.
So, I sent the manuscript to him.
I don't remember offhand the name of the house that took it.
And for years, I thought that they'd published it, but just had never bothered to send me a copy.
However, I found out in the last couple of years that they had gone under.
And they'd sold all their manuscripts to the American Art Agency, which also went under.
So, the original manuscript is in possession of the American Art Agency in somewhere else up in North Hollywood.
So, for the collectors that are going to be reading this, yes, you did write it, but it has never been released as a book.
No, I do have a carbon in the manuscript, but I've made no effort to send it out.
Well, in light of all the meanings and subtleties to the pseudonyms that you use, is there anything to the Noam Deplume William Norfolk?
Well, excuse me, something symbolic or significant in the Noam Deplume, right?
Takeover. But this was the first time I ever did something under another name, and there wasn't any particular significance attached to that,
except that they said if you had MD after the title, it seemed to attract more readers.
Of course, I didn't say what MD stood for. It could have been Doctor of Madness.
That sounds apropos.
Yeah, well, at the time I was thinking about choosing the pseudonym. I happened to be reading Berks Periods, and I was reading about the Duke of Norfolk.
Oh, Norfolk, that's a good name.
Can you give us just a very brief outline? Is that a science fiction book or a fantasy book or just a mainstream book or what?
No, it again is a pornographic romance, I'd call it.
It has to do with lesbianism and also spooky houses and ghosts and all that sort of stuff.
Okay.
My manuscript is a real collector's item because I'm the only one that has it.
I haven't gotten any offers for it yet, and I probably wouldn't sell it.
But as years go by, it becomes more valuable. It might make up for all those collector's items I gave away.
Okay, yeah, maybe you can retire on that since you did.
Well, I doubt if I could retire on it.
Okay, what we want to do is change our cassette tape over to the other side and then we'll start talking about Oz.
Now, what I'm going to do, Mr. Farmer, is send this to Fred Greenberg in New Jersey, and he's going to transcribe it, and we're going to use this in his paperback advertiser.
If you would like copies of that, I'd be glad to send you some when it comes out.
Oh, yeah, I would for my bibliography.
You bet. There'll be several of them.
My address?
Pardon me?
Do you have my address?
Yes, sir, I do.
I don't know. I think it'll probably be one or two months, but I have the four, the three Essex and the brand of books.
So we took pictures of them and we'll have pictures in there just so people can see what they look like.
Okay.
I was kind of glad to hear that, as you desire, it hadn't come out because I don't have it.
And I've got everything else you did in the first edition, so I thought I was going to have to go looking for it.
Well, maybe someday I might rewrite it.
Okay.
I just got through rereading. We're still rewinding here.
I just got through reading the Purple Book. I enjoyed that.
I'd read the New Writers of the Purple Wage, but I hadn't read the others, and I enjoyed that.
Oh, thank you. I had a lot of fun writing the Making of Revelation part one and also a purple passage to Rip Van Lincoln.
Yeah, I would think you would have enjoyed that.
Okay, are we rewound and are we turned over?
Tapes rolling.
Okay, the tapes rolling, so we'll start talking about Oz now in light of your barnstormer and Oz.
Did you read the Oz books when you were a child or as a young adult?
Well, I started reading them when I was very young. I think about six or seven years old.
Our local library here in Peoria, the Brant's Library, had all the books by bound.
And I loved them and read them, re-read them.
And then a couple of about two years ago, I joined the International Wizard of Oz Club, which is composed of people who are devoted to bound works,
and they put out a quarterly called the Bound Jiggle.
I also went out and repurchased all the bounds books.
I had a collection that they were destroyed in the flesh flood in Los Angeles while I was there.
And then I got all the Oz books by Ruth Plumlee Thompson, who continued the series after Baum died.
And I have books by Oz books by several other people, Jack Snow, also Neil, who illustrated bound books for a couple.
And I'd always had a desire ever since I was young to be a writer, and I'd always wanted to write an Oz book.
But I didn't get around to it until I was 64 years old.
Now, of course, the book that I would write when I'm 64 is quite different from the one that I would write by ever ten or eleven, you know?
So I'm waiting to hear the reaction from the members of the International Wizard of Oz Club, because this, as you know, assumes that only the first Oz book, the wonderful Wizard of Oz, is true.
And that's all the rest for fiction.
And then it approaches Oz from a science fictional viewpoint. That is, it could have existed.
If it did, then you have to explain how Scarecrow could be animated and sentient and talk.
What would happen if animals could talk?
How do you account for the Tim Woodman's piecemeal method of being reconstructed out of Tim and explain magic and all that sort of stuff from just where Oz was?
I had a lot of fun doing it, but I also had to do an awful lot of research.
Because it took place in 1923, and I had to read all about what was happening in America at that time.
And I've been a World War I early aviation buff, and I have a considerable library on that, but I still had to look up a lot of things on the Jennings and on the machine guns and the B.A.R.s of that period and Army organization.
Politics and all that sort of thing.
Plus, of course, the agonizing task of being able to explain in a rational manner just how the land of Oz could exist and how all these beings could exist.
Also, there's something you may not have noticed. There's a character in there called Shirtless.
And he actually is a sort of a wild Doc Savage.
If you were acquainted with the first Doc Savage magazine that came out, you will see the Shirtless torn the shreds.
And when the 1965 free issues by Bannum came out, the artist, what was his name?
I can't remember it right off, off right hand.
But anyway, he continued that torn shirt motif.
So Shirtless is sort of an Ozzie and takeoff from Doc Savage.
Plus, the fact that his companion, the Rare Beast logo, is sort of a takeoff from Doc Savage's apy buddy, Monk Mayfair.
It doesn't matter to the reader whether he knows that or not, but if he does know it, it might add a little extra savor.
I didn't catch that. When I read it, I figured there was something there, but I haven't read everything yet.
And one of the things I have not read is Doc Savage. And so I don't get those subtle points.
Well, that's all right. That's just something I add in case you do happen to know it.
Fine, but Shirtless and the Rare Beast stand out by themselves with characters.
Anyway, I departed with a 90 degree angle from the original model.
When I make the shows based on this tape, I'm going to put that in because that's one of the things that makes this fun to find out things like that.
I guess if you hadn't arbitrar- well, I guess not arbitrarily, but if you hadn't cut it off after the first volume and said everything there after was fantasy, the task of writing it would have been that much more complicated.
Well, it would have been impossible because Baum's books had so many changes and contradictions in them later on that it would be impossible to explain.
Plus the fact that if you are writing an original Oz novel, you can do it without getting permission from the people on the copyright because the first two books have gone out of copyright.
I ascertained that before I thought seriously about starting to write on them.
I wrote to Riley Company in Chicago and they told me that I could go ahead and write an Oz novel as long as I did not use any new characters or places in the later books.
That is, those that were written after the first two, if they contain new characters, let's say like the hungry tiger.
Maybe he was in second.
Well, anyway, there were a number of characters like the Noem King that could not have used because they were in the later books.
But the main thing was, obviously, the later books were fiction.
I mean, there were so many contradictions and changes.
Why was Oz so popular?
I guess it was almost an instant success and it continues this and it still is popular.
Why do you think that those books are so popular?
Well, of course, there were many books written back in 1900 and afterwards about foreign lands or ferry land.
But what Baum did was to create a magnificent quest.
And what you have, Dorothy, looking for a way of getting home, the Carly Lyons running Courage, Tim Woodman running a heart, and Scarecrow running brains.
Now, the thing is, they all thought that the wonderful Wizard of Oz could give us to him.
Well, he told him he would, but he put him through a series of trials.
You know, first they had to go out and kill the wicked witches of the West.
And I forget offhand what the other quest was.
But the point was that they had all these qualities that they wanted.
The Scarecrow was ignorant, but he was intelligent.
And Tim Woodman had a very tender heart, even if he didn't have a heart inside that tender heart.
And the Carly Lyons was like all of us.
He gets scared, but he was able to overcome his fear.
But they needed some magical reassurance.
And finally, when they exposed the Wizard of Oz as a humbug, he still concocted devices.
Physical devices, which were symbols of what they wanted.
You know, he had the Carly Lyons drink a pot of courage.
Somebody had suggested, probably Dutch courage.
And he made a heart out of velvet filled with sawdust and put it inside the Tim Woodman's body.
And he stuck... oh, okay.
He put Bran inside the Scarecrow's head, and then he put needles in him.
And he said his head was brand new now, and sharp, needle sharp, of course.
The bottom was great for fun.
And having these physical evidence of things they wanted, they could seem to be very happy.
Although they'd had these qualities all this time.
And I think that moral there, plus the wonderful quest that found both form,
is something that appealed to the hearts of all the kids and of course adults, too.
And then, of course, Dorothy had had the means of getting home all the time,
because when the wicked witch of the east was crushed by her house, dropping out of the cyclone,
she put on the silver slippers of the witch.
And wore them all through her adventure, not knowing that all she had to do was wish to be back in Kansas,
and she could go home.
It wasn't until Glenda the good at the end of the book told her that her shoes could do it,
and Dorothy realized that all this time she could have gone home a few minutes after she got into it,
if she'd wanted to.
In other words, Bob was saying, well, look around you.
Maybe you have the means for success or escape around you.
You don't have to find some magical means.
Although, of course, the silver slippers were magical.
Well, anyway, that's my explanation of popularity of the book.
And of course there are millions, I suppose, who've never read the book, who know about Oz through the movie.
In A Bond Storm Revised, you, the character that interested me most, it seemed to be the character you were most into,
was Glenda the good or Glenda the ambiguous.
Yeah, I'm not going.
Okay, she was an interesting character.
Yeah, well, I sort of fell in love with Glenda when I was little, and of course now being almost 65,
I have sort of an adult view point of Oz.
I can still enjoy it in an almost childlike manner, but now being an adult,
I can see that there are profundity of three dimensions to that.
Then it came to me that perhaps all these adventures of dirt that had gone through had been sort of subtly arranged by Glenda,
in order to knock off one, the Witch of the East and two of the Witch of the West,
and also get rid of the wizard whom she knew was a humbug.
Well, I became very much interested in her character, and then I thought, hmm,
President Harding died in 1923, did Glenda have anything to do with that?
Are you going to blame the Depression on her in a sequel, maybe?
No, I hadn't thought about that.
Well, that's a good idea.
I'd have somebody else responsible for it.
You know, Pete, I kind of like these big paranoia things anyway,
like one person's potting or making conspiracies overthrow the whole world and all that.
When you wrote Barnstormer?
Yeah, I have to write that down.
Okay.
When you wrote Barnstormer, what audience were you aiming for?
A science fiction audience.
Although, of course, there are a lot of people who don't read much science fiction,
who are still like Oz.
But primarily, I think I was writing it for myself.
I mean, you know, you get down to the bottom of it,
because I've always loved Oz, and I always wanted to write it for Oz, but I finally did it.
And I might write another one, because when I got to the end, I realized that
I really hadn't developed, uh, Jenny, the animated airplane enough.
But the fact that Oz is beautiful, there are always more wonders there, you know.
I might write one more, maybe four or five years from now.
That was going to be my next question.
It seemed that it didn't end abruptly,
but nonetheless, there were a few things that the reader, I think, would like to know about.
So it would be appreciated if you continued it.
Yeah, well, as I said in the afterward, I had planned on Hank Stover, my hero,
encountering the old and dying Wizard of Oz up in the North Country, you know.
But just wasn't time enough.
I was under a lot of pressure to get the manuscript in in time.
But I could use that in a sequel, for instance.
Because I had a pretty interesting theme that gets out in the night.
And there are a lot of other things.
Well, yeah, I think it's a science fiction book.
It took what Baum had set out, and then I tried to extrapolate it.
Extrapolate from it, go deeper.
A lot of things that Baum, who was writing a fairy tale for children, just glossed over it.
Which he should have done, because children aren't interested in great detail.
But the background that Baum furnished, that I had to go ahead and figure out
just what kind of society would have existed in Oz.
And, for instance, the effect of intelligent, language-speaking animals.
What would that have on society?
Certainly Oz society would not be much like Earth society.
Just because of the present of those animals.
Just like you had almost extra-terrestrial people living among you.
You don't really have to deal, you know, and strike some sort of social balance with it.
I was also struck by the explanation for the purpose of Scarecrow's in Oz.
Yeah, that was a complete twist, right?
Scarecrow's instead of being set up to scare away the crows
or set up there to advertise the fact that there was food growing there for them.
Well, that's the only way it could be.
If crows, as the intelligent human beings, then can talk,
they're not going to be fooled one minute by Scarecrow, right?
But Dorothy had it soon, because of her short stay there.
Scarecrow's were up there for the purpose they were set up for on Earth.
But I figured out otherwise.
The other interesting reaction that I had was when I read the scene
in which the pilot of the first mission that tried to make it through,
when the pilot was killed, when they buried him and they had this barbaric funeral ritual.
That was kind of interesting as well.
Well, Oz is not a namby-pamby land.
It's real and inhabited by real people, even if they're very short people.
And if you have people who are descended from the ancient gods,
who intermingled with the Anifles originally,
then you're not going to have a society quite like the medieval societies of Earth.
There would be a lot of customs that would be different.
And like all societies, even Oz society, you know, has its sinister aspects,
its frightening aspects, its alien aspects.
So I'll go into more depth on that in the sequel,
or possibly if I were to write that quaddling translation of the Wizard of Oz.
I might go into that in the forward frame.
Have you gotten any feedback from either Fred Meyer or the people in the International Wizard of Oz fan club,
or just any Oz fans in general?
Yeah, I got a letter from Nick Corral-Linkel who apparently has done some movie work too.
And he even wrote a documentary on Oz once, which Disney didn't take,
because they said they wanted to take a different direction.
But he still has hopes of producing it someday.
And he loved it.
And as a matter of fact, he's going to call me up,
maybe the second for an interview, which will be printed on the Balm Bugle, I believe.
Oh good, okay.
It'll be accompanying a review of the book.
Hey, Fred Meyer sent me a copy of the Balm Bugle, which I had not seen before,
and it had all sorts of things about the history of Oz as a stage play and that sort of thing.
It was really interesting. I didn't realize it had that much background.
Well, yeah, the Wizard of Oz club takes a very scholarly approach to everything,
and they've really gone in to all the Balm's works in great depth.
I'm not really an... I guess I am kind of a fan.
I never would have read it except I have a daughter who's now five,
and I guess I'm in volume ten. I'm reading her a chapter a night.
And so I was... Of course, I'd seen the movie, but I really enjoyed a barnstormer
because I had read the first one, and I could understand why you chose not to go into the rest of it
and treated them as fantasy because of all the things.
But it's really enjoyable to see it, to read it myself and then to see it through her eyes,
because she obviously sees it on a different level.
Yeah, well, I'm glad you're doing that. I'm starting off my granddaughter on the Oz book.
And I hope that she'll have the same enthusiasm that I had for her.
The only thing I do sometimes... The English gets a bit antiquated,
so I maybe modernize it just a little bit, just so she'll know what the guy's really doing.
Well, I can understand that. She's five.
He's climbing the stairs. He's not ascending the whatever.
Five-year-olds don't quite get all that... the flowery language sometimes.
Yeah, but later on when she starts reading herself, you know,
she'll be able to tackle the problem in difficulty.
Mr. Farmer, that's it. I do appreciate getting to talk to you about this.
Oh, I'm glad to do it.
Great. I enjoyed meeting you in June in Dallas.
I didn't have my copy of Love Song then, so I'll have to go to a con where you're at one of these days and get it signed.
Yeah, you could always mail it to me. I can mail it back.
Okay, I may do that. I'll...
Better ensure it doesn't get lost.
Okay, I'll do that. Okay, I would appreciate that. I might take you up on that.
Yeah.
Okay, again, thanks very much. It's been very enjoyable.
And I look forward to seeing whatever it is that you put out next. It's always a pleasure to read it.
Okay.
Take care, Mr. Farmer.
Thank you.
Good night now.
Bye.